Yes, we're ready to go now. Today is Friday the 23rd of September. My name is Jill Willie
and I'm at Habit Hardware talking to Mr John Jones, who has lived in this area all his
life. John, thank you very much for agreeing to have a chat with me. First of all, could
you just start with your year of birth, John, please? I was born on the 2nd of February,
1948. And can you tell me where you were born? I was born in a bedroom at Upper Llandfadog.
Llandfadog. Can you tell me exactly where Upper Llandfadog or Llandfadog, Llandfadog
is then, John? Well, as you go from Raider up the Ellen Valley, you go past the Ellen
Valley Hotel and it's the next farm on your right about 300 yards away. Thank you. And
what sort of facilities do you remember as you were growing up? Things like running water
and etc. Can you give me some details of that sort of thing? Well, we had no electricity.
The toilet was outside about 50 yards away and the water we had from the spout and my mother
did all the washing and that out there and by the brook and bathing was a tin bath brought into the
kitchen, perhaps twice a week, sometimes only once a week. And no electricity so we had these
paraffin lamps that you had to pump up all the time when the pressure dropped.
I see. And how much work did you yourself do around the farm, John, as a young boy growing up?
Um, I did quite a bit. When I attended Ellen Village School, I used to milk a cow every morning
by hand because we sold milk around the Elan Village and that was my contribution. I milked
this one cow who was my favourite, perched on a little stool and then I walked to the school
afterwards. And you actually got your water from where exactly, John? Well, between the house and
building at Llanfadog, there was a brook coming down and we had a spout and a little pool there
and that is where the water came from. But when I was about 10, we had it piped about 500 yards
from another well out in the field and that was wonderful spring water and the only time
I saw that goat rye was in the hot summer of 1976. Indeed. And were your family born at
and grew up in Llanfadog, Upper? My father was born there and my mother was born at the
Llanfadog. Now, we were a large family, John, in Llanfadog? Yes, we were. I was the fourth,
but there was a baby loss between me and the sister above me. So we were five really.
And so there was five of us, but I was born a long time after. My two older sisters was 22 and 20
when I was born and two of my three sisters were married with children. So I have nephews and nieces
older than myself. That's quite unusual, but of course it does happen.
What sort of major events can you remember in the Allen Valley as you were growing up, John?
Well, I suppose the first one was when the Queen came with the ducal hellenbrough in October 1952.
I would have been four-year-old and I just remember standing outside the hotel over on where the
bicycle path is now with our flags and my sister Joan was a waitress in the Allen Valley and she
waited on the Queen. Oh, what an accolade, my word. And what places did you have to play in and to
generally just explore in your Allen Valley area? On the farm, you had plenty of places,
you had fields all around you, but I think me and my nephews enjoyed going down the brook to where
it meets the River Allen and we were catching minnows there until I was old enough to have a
rod and line and I loved fishing in those days. Quite a lot of that goes on at the Allen Valley,
doesn't it? Right, now what memories do you have of the big shearings that took place in the Allen
Valley, John? Oh, well, it was the highlight of the year. You swap men with neighbouring farms,
so you know there might be 30 men would come to your shearing and it was the day of the year.
And you started off with breakfast and then you had lunch and tea and hopefully you finished
about five o'clock. And we had one hill which was up above the Clarewyn Dam, so them sheep had to be
driven down on a two-day drive sort of thing to share at Uppel and Vadog and then that night they
were taken back up to the hen run and they went on from there back to the hill next day.
And shearing was a wonderful thing. As a boy, the highlight was after dinner we'd have a game of
football with all the younger men. But what I remember, there were four or five old men
sat outside the barn on a bench all day and all they were sitting down and talking
about tales and they seemed very old to me. But when I think back, they were probably only in their
late 60s, you know, but the way they dressed and that I thought they were a hundred.
But I'm sure they had lots of interesting memories to share, yes. So would you say that despite the
rural locality you had plenty to do and a very good social life, you knew everyone?
Oh yes, I knew everyone and as I'd got two nephews living behind the Ellen Valley Hotel,
the three of us sort of played together most nights and played football in the field at
Llanwadog and later on when the Birmingham City police cadets came to Ellen Village,
they had goal posts put up on the green, so we used to go up there to play football
and I've seen us cycle down to Llanowethal to play Boys of Llanowethal and
well everywhere we went we cycled and I was a founder member of Raider Young Farmers and that
started in 1963 and still we were old enough to drive, we went there on a push bike which was
up in Bryn Tyrian and they held the meetings. And Bryn Tyrian I understand is the
then secondary school of the area, is that correct? Yes it was. The only time I ever
attended Bryn Tyrian was to try my 11 plus. Right, we'll come on to that now then, on to school life.
Can you tell me where you went to school and what age you were when you started John?
I went to Ellen Village Primary School at Easter 1953.
My birthday was February so I'd just gone five and my sister Joan took me to school the first morning
and all the other pupils were stood in the entrance I think waiting the newcomer and
I was there till 1959 and I had many a happy time looking back in the Valley School.
We were never more than 20 pupils and I think when I left they were down to 12
and there was two teachers there. The first teacher was Mrs. Jim Price or Mrs. Betty Price
and the senior teacher was Miss Chu.
I have heard those names. Could I add one more thing? Please. The only thing I hated about the
Lord Mayor of Birmingham came down and we had the June tea and of course the tea was nice.
I loved that but afterwards we had to perform on stage and every year they seemed to have me to
sing a solo and after that the Lady Mayoress presented us all with a book for what we'd done
during the year. If you'd done well you had the best books.
Right and am I right in thinking that the school at the Ellen Village was where the lodge is now?
Yes it was. There was a school immediately above it when the works were going on but this new
school was built in 1909 and my mother went to the old school just above it but my father
was not allowed to go to that school because he was living in the Radnyshire side and he had to
walk three miles to come tie the school every day. So you yourself went to the Ellen Village
school but you were still in what was then Radnyshire weren't you? So were there many other
children from Radnyshire in that school? No I think at the time I left there was just two of us.
The other boy didn't try the 11 plus so he went straight to Brinturion. There was three the same
age as me living on the Breckinshire side so they went to Bilth High School and they didn't have to
11 plus. I was the only one out of the five of us that had to try the 11 plus. And was that
because Radnyshire and Breckinshire being different authorities had decided different rules regarding
the 11 plus? Yes it has. I mean it's different now you can go to any school but in them days
it was Radnyshire and Breckinshire and I only lived 200 yards from the river Ellen and if I'd
been the other side I'd have been in Breckinshire. And would not have had to take the 11 plus I see.
Now having taken the 11 plus what school did you then go to John? I went to Landerinder Grammar
School in the first week of September 1959 when a school car driven by Mr. Harold Ashton from the
opposite Jimmy Lloyd's yard drove me down to the bus and then we met the bus up by the Smithfield
in Radar and there was a boys bus and a girls bus. And how long were you at that school traveling
to and from then John? Well I left in 1963 because I'd had a couple of run-ins with Mr. Howell's
headmaster and he said that I had to try my own levels and I said I'll show you and I left.
If you left right. John you must have seen quite a lot of changes in the valley. Would you like to
talk a little bit about the development of the valley as you know it? Well I've seen lots of
changes not for the better in my opinion. I you know although I'm a proud Welshman,
Birmingham were very good landlords and they were good to the farmers and they would provide new
gates and hurdles and fencing material every year and then when it changed over to Welsh water
it was a downward spiral and I think the valley was much better in those days, much tidier.
You could fish from the Cabin Dam to Garry Dee. That railway line had two or three sheep in it and
it kept all the foliage down. Now it's just like a jungle and you can't fish one yard of it.
Very very unfortunate because fishing is really quite a prominent activity in our area isn't it?
Yes. Speaking about the livestock now, how often did you actually come into Raerdy to the market
or to any other market? Well I don't remember coming much. My father you know would bring
a cow or cow and calf or something occasionally to the mart and we'd always sell our sail ews
in the autumn and we drove them down with two dogs and I sometimes walked in front and my father
behind and we never lost one. We always got them to the market and tied the dogs up there all day
and sold and one year the prices were poor so we didn't sell. I was about 16 at the time.
Anyway my father was getting on then and a car stopped when we were driving these sheep home
and he offered father a lift home and he said I'll leave my dog with you and soon as father got in
a car the dog went back towards Raerdy and unfortunately he got killed by a car and I
got the sheep home with my dog and then my sister Joan went back to Raerdy in the van to look for
this dog and found him dead on the road and brought him back. That was a sad day. How unfortunate.
And we took the sheep to the next fair and didn't do any better so we may as well have sold them on
the first fair. All memories of course Joan aren't they? Yes. Now if we could come back to
the school I believe you had some relatives that actually taught at that school
John. Can you tell us a little bit about that please? Well they didn't teach at that school.
They taught at the old school up the cabin which is now under the water. I think they moved here
in 1891. Elizabeth Abley and her sister Alice Ann Abley who became my grandmother. She married
Evan Jones from Upland Paddock and they were brought here to teach English because they knew
that the dams was coming and there was a lot of English and Irish and Scotch people moving into
the area so that was the end of the Welsh language in the Allen Valley school.
The demise of the Welsh language in the valley is something I'd like to touch on now. Prior to that
your family would have been Welsh speakers presumably, your ancestors. Yes. Do you actually
remember any of your family older relatives actually speaking Welsh as their day-to-day
language? Well my father could speak Welsh quite good but as he had an English mother there was
English spoke at home you know but his father was fluent Welsh and then on my mother's side the family
they were all fluent Welsh but you know they had died before I was sort of born so and my
grandfather and grandmother from the clean they were more English than Welsh because they were
both well one was brought up but the Gunfad and the other was born brought up at the Dunfad
Newbridge on Wye. I see and so was Welsh not taught at all then in either of those schools
the the old one you've mentioned and the current one was Welsh not taught at all? No there was no
Welsh in school when I was there well we did the national anthem and that in Welsh but
no it was all English. I see and what about your grammar school days then in in Llandrindod
was did you did you learn Welsh there at all? Yes when I went to Llandrindod I had the choice
to either learn Welsh or French and I was taught Welsh with a teacher called Annie Griffiths.
Right so sadly well there's a real resurgence now in learning Welsh of course but it's you know
it's a little sad. Yeah my two grandchildren now Arthur and Marnie are both in the Welsh unit.
That's a very good idea that's here in Raerdyr isn't it? Yes in yes in Brinterion which I'm very
pleased about because I am very Welsh you know in my thoughts. Very commendable John I'm sure.
John could we touch on pony trekking I understand you had quite an involvement in that in your
younger days. Yes I was on the pony trekking committee for many years they were called Raerdyr
Association and Mr David Evans was the secretary and people like Kinsey Morgan and
Gerald Morgan were chairman and vice chairman and I was always interested in it probably because
every year a lot of pretty girls came along and I met one called Gina Day and after on and off
romance for four years I married her and she is now still called Gina Jones but unfortunately
we got divorced but the trekking was a wonderful thing and I've seen up to a hundred ponies going
out on a day you know terrific line of trekkers and they came from all over the well all over
Europe actually but in the end I was guide for two years and it was a much harder job then because
instead of having a trekker for a week who would pick up things you had day trekkers and half of
them couldn't ride and you couldn't go any faster than the slowest rider or the poorest rider and
some of you had to lead you know but I always found out that if anybody arrived on a motorbike
they could ride and was the balance was right I've never seen a poor rider off a motorbike
using the same muscles I wouldn't I wouldn't doubt fine now John you've spoken about
riding your bike a lot for recreation etc did you use horses as a means of transport
for getting around generally at all oh yes my father was always on horseback he used to do all
the gathering of sheep on horseback and I rode a horse a lot like I was probably riding a three
year old I think I started off on the donkey in Aberystwyth but I've got a photo of me on that and
we had a hill up above the clowind dam called Clodhia so when we wanted to gather that
we would ride up to the hen front and then go over the top of the hill and drop down on Clodhia
always on horseback drive the sheep back down what we wanted to bring down to the hen front
have dinner there with my auntie and uncle and then drive them down to Llanfadog on horseback
but mind you in those days and talking up to 1979 the roads were much quieter than today
and you felt quite happy now you can't go 100 yards without there's a car behind you
things have certainly changed haven't they in the transport department yes and John I understand
you work very hard and long on compiling your family tree and am I right in thinking that
it takes you right back to the Lewis Lloyds the original landowners yes well me and my son Tom
have done a lot of work on it and I've had help of other people but being as they were sort of
indigentry it was quite easy to trace them but Tom has gone back I think it's 700 years
to the Powells from Lanarkow who married into the Lewis Lloyds and I've got it down to this present
day which I'm very proud of and now when the dams are very low the walls of Nantwilt have all come
sight of the gardens you know and that's what I think you know that it all started for me in
the Allen Valley well it's wonderful to see these houses suddenly arising out of the water isn't it
it makes you want to do that you mentioned the Llanarkow that was and Nantwilt I believe where
the where the Lewis Lloyds lived were they actually in the Allen Valley or were they in the Clydewyn
Valley well it's actually on the banks of the Clirwyn River isn't it the Nantwilt estate but
I mean they own so much of it right up to Clirwyn Farm which you know is miles above the Clirwyn Dam
and one of my ancestors Peter Jones from Abergwessin who already was a huge landowner
over there and had thousands of sheep he married into the Lewis Lloyds and the rest is history as
they say and how long have you been working on this family tree then you and your son oh
you're never finished you know there's something comes up new all the time I found a cousin in
the other day Sanders her name is Miss Sanders and there's a lot of them out in Perth and Patagonia
and um mother's great uncle David Jones had a farm out in Buenos Aires and the name of the farm
was Alvira and my mother named my older sister Alvira Mary how nice
right you have grandchildren now now John um are they enjoying being at the valley and enjoying
the places where you grew up yes because I've still got some ground of belonging to Apple and
Raddick and they love it up there Arthur went up the other day to burn a bit of cardboard and
and he thinks it's wonderful and Marnie's up there every night with her father running a dog around
and they I think it's nice to get out of town
what better place indeed than the the beautiful land the beautiful Ellen Valley
well John it's been absolutely fascinating talking to you we could go on all day really
thinking about things so thank you very very much for your input your time
and all your fascinating information thank you very much for you asking me these questions
you're welcome